>> Thompson: ON THIS EDITION FOR
SUNDAY, DECEMBER 27:
IRAQI FORCES RETAKE THE ISIS
STRONGHOLD OF RAMADI; DEADLY
TORNADOES STRIKE TEXAS
OVERNIGHT; AND, THE EVOLUTION OF
MONGOLIAN ROCK AND ROLL.
NEXT, ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
>>FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS
AT LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
MEGAN THOMPSON.
>> Thompson: GOOD EVENING.
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
I'M MEGAN THOMPSON, IN FOR
HARI SREENIVASAN.
THE IRAQI ARMY CLAIMED A MAJOR
VICTORY TODAY OVER ISLAMIC STATE
MILITANTS.
THE ARMY SAID IT HAS DEFEATED
ISIS FIGHTERS IN THE CITY OF
RAMADI, ABOUT 80 MILES WEST OF
BAGHDAD, AFTER A WEEK OF HEAVY
FIGHTING.
A MILITARY SPOKESMAN SAID THE
U.S.-TRAINED TROOPS HAVE
RETAKEN A COMPLEX ISIS WAS USING
AS A HEADQUARTERS AND ARE NOW
FOCUSING ON CLEARING OUT POCKETS
OF RESISTANCE.
THE IRAQI GOVERNMENT PLANS TO
HOLD A FLAG RAISING CEREMONY
OVER THE COMPLEX ON MONDAY.
RAMADI WAS CAPTURED BY ISIS IN
MAY, IN WHAT WAS SEEN AS AN
EMBARRASSING DEFEAT FOR THE
IRAQI ARMY.
AT THE TIME, U.S. DEFENSE
SECRETARY ASH CARTER SAID IRAQI
FORCES HAD SHOWN, "NO WILL TO
FIGHT."
CLEANUP AND RECOVERY EFFORTS ARE
UNDERWAY IN THE SUBURBS OF
DALLAS, TEXAS TODAY, AFTER
TORNADOES AND POWERFUL STORMS
RIPPED THROUGH THE REGION LAST
NIGHT, KILLING AT LEAST ELEVEN
PEOPLE.
DOZENS WERE INJURED IN A GROUP
OF STORMS THAT SWEPT THROUGH A
FORTY-MILE LONG AREA AROUND
DALLAS.
POWERFUL WINDS BLASTED ROOFS OFF
HOMES, PULVERIZED TREES AND
POWER-LINES, AND HURLED CARS
OFF THE INTERSTATE.
SECTIONS OF THE DALLAS SUBURBS
ARE UNDER A 24-HOUR CURFEW.
NATIONAL WEATHER SERVICE
OFFICIALS ARE STILL
INVESTIGATING THE MAGNITUDE OF
LAST NIGHT'S STORMS-- THE LATEST
IN A STRING OF SEVERE WEATHER
ACROSS THE COUNTRY IN THE PAST
WEEK THAT'S CLAIMED OVER 30
LIVES.
IN SOUTH AMERICA, HEAVY RAINS
HAVE TRIGGERED THE WORST
FLOODING IN HALF A CENTURY,
FORCING MORE THAN 150,000 PEOPLE
TO EVACUATE THEIR HOMES.
LARGE AREAS OF PARAGUAY,
ARGENTINA, URUGUAY, AND BRAZIL
ARE UNDER WATER AFTER DAYS OF
TORRENTIAL STORMS, CAUSED BY THE
EL NINO WEATHER PHENOMENON.
THREE MAJOR RIVERS IN THE REGION
HAVE SWOLLEN BEYOND THEIR BANKS.
OFFICIALS SAY AT LEAST SIX
PEOPLE ARE DEAD.
PARAGUAY, HARDEST HIT BY THE
STORMS, IS UNDER A STATE OF
EMERGENCY-- WATER LEVELS IN THAT
COUNTRY AND IN ARGENTINA ARE
EXPECTED TO RISE.
CHICAGO POLICE ARE SAYING THE
SHOOTING DEATH OF A 55-YEAR-OLD
WOMAN BY AN OFFICER EARLY
SATURDAY MORNING WAS AN
ACCIDENT.
POLICE FATALLY SHOT BETTIE JONES
AS THEY RESPONDED TO A
DISTURBANCE CALL ON THE
CITY'S WEST SIDE-- DURING WHICH
19-YEAR-OLD QUINTONIO LEGRIER
ALSO WAS SHOT AND KILLED.
JONES WAS LEGRIER'S DOWNSTAIRS
NEIGHBOR.
LEGRIER'S FATHER HAD CALLED
POLICE, SAYING HIS SON WAS
THREATENING HIM WITH A BASEBALL
BAT.
RELATIVES SAID LEGRIER HAD
STRUGGLED WITH MENTAL HEALTH
PROBLEMS.
WITNESSES REPORTED SEEING JONES
OPEN THE DOOR FOR POLICE AND
LEGRIER WIELDING THE BAT.
THE OFFICER WHO SHOT JONES AND
LEGRIER, WHO WERE BOTH BLACK,
HAS NOT BEEN IDENTIFIED.
POLICE ANNOUNCED A CHANGE IN
POLICY THAT WILL PLACE ALL
OFFICERS INVOLVED IN SHOOTINGS
ON ADMINISTRATIVE LEAVE FOR
30 DAYS, INSTEAD OF THE CURRENT
THREE-DAY PERIOD.
THE PRACTICES OF THE CHICAGO
POLICE DEPARTMENT ARE ALREADY
BEING REVIEWED BY THE JUSTICE
DEPARTMENT.
A YEAR-LONG INVESTIGATION
PUBLISHED BY "THE WASHINGTON
POST" THIS WEEKEND, TAKES AN
IN-DEPTH LOOK AT THE NEARLY
1,000 PEOPLE FATALLY SHOT BY
POLICE IN 2015.
AMONG THE FINDINGS: MENTAL
ILLNESS PLAYED A ROLE IN 25% OF
THE KILLINGS; IN 75% OF THE
FATAL SHOOTINGS, POLICE WERE
UNDER ATTACK OR DEFENDING
SOMEONE WHO WAS; AND ONE IN TEN
PEOPLE SHOT AND KILLED BY POLICE
WERE UNARMED.
FOR MORE INSIGHT, WE ARE JOINED
BY KIMBRIELL KELLY OF "THE
WASHINGTON POST."
>> KIMBRIELL YOUR REPORT PUTS
SHOOTINGS BY POLICE OFFICERS
INTO THREE MAIN CATEGORIES.
CAN YOU TELL US ABOUT THOSE?
>> YES.
ONE OF THE BIGGEST CATEGORIES IS
PEOPLE WHO ARE MENTALLY ILL AND
THEN ALSO, THOSE WHO ARE UNARMED
WHICH IS A SMALL PERCENTAGE BUT
THERE'S SOME DISPARITY THERE
WHEN IT COMES TO RACE.
AND THE MENTALLY ILL ONE OF THE
BIG PROBLEMS AS YOU SAID THE
NUMBER WAS ONE IN FOUR AND
OFFICERS AND POLICE EXPERTS WILL
AGREE THAT THERE'S NOT ENOUGH
TRAINING AMONG POLICE OFFICERS,
A VAST MAJORITY OF PEOPLE SHOT
WERE IN CHASES AND THEY
WERE ARMED.
TRAINING IS DEFINITELY
NECESSARY.
>> I'M GOING TO QUOTE FROM THE
REPORT, IN THE MAJORITY OF CASES
IN WHICH POLICE SHOT AND KILLED
A PERSON WHO HAD ATTACKED, THE
PERSON WHO WAS SHOT WAS WHITE.
THAT ONLY TELLS PART OF THE
STORY, RIGHT?
>> CORRECT, THAT IS PART OF THE
STORY.
WE KNOW THE VAST MAJORITY OF THE
PEOPLE IN THE COUNTRY ARE WHITE.
AFRICAN AMERICAN MEN MAKE UP
ABOUT 6% OF THE POPULATION AND
WHEN IT COMES TO UNARMED
SUSPECTS BLACK MEN MAKE UP ABOUT
40% OF BOTH MEMBERS.
SO THERE IS A DISPROPORTIONATE
NUMBER THERE IN TERMS OF UNARMED
AFRICAN AMERICAN MEN THAT WERE
KILLED BY POLICE.
>> CAN YOU TALK A LITTLE BIT
ABOUT THE ROLE THAT VIDEO LAST
PLAYED IN THESE SHOOTINGS.
>> VIDEO IS VERY INTERESTING
BECAUSE TEN YEARS AGO, YOU AT
ANY TIME HAVE PEOPLE TAKING
PICTURES ON CELL PHONE CAMS CAM
LAST AND NOW YOU DO.
THAT IS ACTUALLY ONE OF THE
PRIMARY REASONS IN THE INCREASE
IN INDICTMENTS FROM OFFICERS
BECAUSE THERE IS EVIDENCE.
PEOPLE ARE STARTING TO QUESTION
THE WORD OF NOT ALL POLICE
OFFICERS BUT SOME POLICE
OFFICERS IN THIS CASE.
AND THERE IS EVIDENCE TO
PROSECUTE.
WHAT YOU ARE SEEING IS AN UPTICK
IN THE NUMBER OF INDICTMENTS.
THIS YEAR TWO OR THREE TIMES
MORE INDICTMENTS OF OFFICERS
THAN THERE HAVE BEEN IN YEARS
PAST.
PRIOR THERE HAVE BEEN FOUR EVERY
YEAR, FOUR OR FIVE A YEAR IN THE
LAST DECADE AND NOW YOU SEE IN
THE LAST YEAR ABOUT 18.
BUT THE DIFFERENCE THAT WE SEE
EVEN THOUGH WE'RE SEEING MORE
INDICTMENTS MORE CHARGES OF
OFFICERS YOU'RE ACTUALLY SEEING
THE OUTCOMES ARE A LITTLE LESS
SEVERE BECAUSE MOST OF THOSE
OFFICERS ARE EITHER BEING
ACQUITTED, THEIR CASES ARE
DISMISSED OR THE CHARGES ARE
DROPPED.
>> AND I UNDERSTAND THAT
STATISTICS ABOUT THESE FATAL
SHOOTINGS ARE NOT PARTICULARLY
WELL KEPT AT LEAST BY LAW
ENFORCEMENT.
CAN YOU TALK A LITTLE BIT ABOUT
THAT?
>> YES, IN DOCUMENTING TALL
FATAL POLICE SHOOT -- ALL THE
FATAL POLICE SHOOTINGS AT THE
WASHINGTON POST WE USE PRIMARY
SOURCES, NEWS ARTICLES, ONLINE
DATABASES AND THE NUMBER YOU
INCLUDED EARLIER, NEARLY A
THOUSAND THIS YEAR AS OF
DECEMBER 24th.
AND THAT NUMBER IS USUALLY KEPT
BY THE FBI AND THE BUREAU OF
JUSTICE STATISTICS.
AND WHAT WE FOUND AT THE
WASHINGTON POST IS THAT OUR
NUMBER IS NEARLY TWICE THAT OF
THE NUMBER THAT'S ACTUALLY PUT
OUT BY THE FBI.
SO THE FBI ARE NOW
UNDERTAKING A GOOD LOOK AT HOW
THEY HAVE BEEN TRACKING THAT AND
MAKING EFFORTS TO DO A BETTER
JOB.
>> OKAY, KIMBRIELL KELLY FROM
THE WASHINGTON POST, THANK YOU
SO MUCH FOR JOINING US.
>> Thompson: AUTHORITIES ARE NOW
INVESTIGATING A FIRE THAT BROKE
OUT IN A HOUSTON MOSQUE ON
CHRISTMAS DAY AS ARSON.
FEDERAL LAW ENFORCEMENT
OFFICIALS SAID THE FIRE WAS
SUSPICIOUS BECAUSE OF THE
MULTIPLE POINTS OF ORIGIN, AND
ARE NOW COMBING THROUGH SECURITY
FOOTAGE.
200 PEOPLE WERE INSIDE THE
MOSQUE WHEN THE FIRE STARTED.
NO ONE WAS HURT.
ONE OF THE MOST INFLUENTIAL
PSYCHIATRISTS OF OUR TIME,
ROBERT SPITZER, DIED FRIDAY IN
SEATTLE.
IN 1973, SPITZER ENGINEERED A
LANDMARK VOTE BY THE AMERICAN
PSYCHIATRIC ASSOCIATION, TO STOP
TREATING HOMOSEXUALITY AS AN
ILLNESS.
AND LATER, IN EDITING THE
PROFESSION'S DIAGNOSTIC MANUAL,
HE APPLIED THE FIRST CLEAR
CRITERIA TO DESCRIBE AND
DIAGNOSE MENTAL DISORDERS.
HE COINED NAMES FOR CONDITIONS
THAT ARE HOUSEHOLD WORDS TODAY,
LIKE ANOREXIA, BIPOLAR AND PANIC
DISORDERS, AND POST TRAUMATIC
STRESS DISORDER.
BUT IN 2001, SPITZER CAUSED A
STORM WITH A STUDY SEEMING TO
SUPPORT THERAPIES TO "CURE"
HOMOSEXUALS.
HE RETRACTED THE STUDY IN 2012,
ADMITTING IT WAS FLAWED.
ROBERT SPITZER WAS 83 YEARS OLD.
>> Thompson: CAN YOU IMAGINE
LIVING ON ONLY TWO DOLLARS A
DAY?
HERE IN NEW YORK CITY, THAT
WOULDN'T EVEN BUY YOU A SINGLE
RIDE ON THE SUBWAY.
YET, MILLIONS OF AMERICANS SPEND
A PORTION OF THE YEAR SURVIVING
ON LESS.
THE BOOK "TWO DOLLARS A DAY:
LIVING ON ALMOST NOTHING IN
AMERICA," EXPLORES THE 1.5
MILLION AMERICAN HOUSEHOLDS
SCRAPING BY FOR EXTENDED PERIODS
OF TIME WITH PRACTICALLY NO CASH
INCOME.
HARI SREENIVASAN SPOKE WITH THE
BOOK'S CO-AUTHOR, KATHRYN EDIN,
A SOCIOLOGIST AT JOHNS HOPKINS
UNIVERSITY.
THEIR CONVERSATION IS PART OF
OUR COVERAGE OF POVERTY AND
OPPORTUNITY IN AMERICA, CALLED"
CHASING THE DREAM."
>> Sreenivasan: SO HOW IS IT
POSSIBLE THAT YOU CAN ACTUALLY
GET BY ON LESS THAN $2 A DAY IN
AMERICA?
>> WELL, AS IT TURNS OUT IT'S
NOT POSSIBLE.
WE LIVE IN THE MOST ADVANCED
CAPITALIST SOCIETY IN THE WORLD,
AND A LOT OF COUNTRIES THAT USE
THIS $2 A DAY RUBRIC TO MEASURE
EXTREME POVERTY, THERE IS A RICH
BARTER ECONOMY.
SO YOU DON'T IN SOME SENSES NEED
CASH, BUT IN THE US YOU REALLY
DO NEED CASH.
>> Sreenivasan: I AM ASSUMING
THAT THE FOOD MUST BE COMING
FROM PANTRIES?
>> ABOUT A HALF OF THE $2 A DAY
POOR DO GET FOOD-STAMPS, THAT'S
A RESOURCE THAT PEOPLE IN THE
DEVELOPING WORLD OF COURSE DON'T
HAVE.
IT'S A VITAL RESOURCE, BUT THE
SAD THING ABOUT SNAP IS THAT
WHEN YOU HAVE ABSOLUTELY NO CASH
AND YOUR KIDS NEED SOCKS AND
UNDERWEAR FOR SCHOOL OR THAT
BACKPACK OR THE PROTRACTOR FOR
MATH CLASS, YOU ARE GOING TO
TRADE IN YOUR FOOD-STAMPS FOR
CASH, AND THAT'S THE KIND OF
BARTER THAT WE MOST COMMONLY
SEE.
PEOPLE FEEL BADLY ABOUT IT.
THEY FEEL THAT IT'S ACTUALLY A
CRIMINAL THING TO DO, AND
ACTUALLY IT IS PUNISHABLE BY LAW
AT QUITE A SEVERE DEGREE, BUT
YET WHEN IT COMES TO YOUR KIDS
YOU ARE GOING TO DO WHAT YOU
HAVE TO DO.
>> Sreenivasan: NOW AMERICANS
WATCHING THIS ARE GOING TO SAY,
LISTEN, WE MIGHT NOT BE AS BIG A
SAFETY NET AS SOME OF THE NORDIC
COUNTRIES BUT WE'VE GOT WELFARE,
WE HAVE GOT FOOD-STAMPS, WE ARE
DOING SO MUCH, HOW IS IT THAT
THERE ARE STILL THIS MANY PEOPLE
THAT ARE SLIPPING THROUGH THE
CRACKS?
>> SO THIS IS THE REAL STORY
HERE, RIGHT?
IN 1996 WE HAD ABOUT FIVE
MILLION ADULTS AND ABOUT 10
MILLION CHILDREN ON WELFARE.
WE REFORMED WELFARE IN 1996.
WE REPLACED IT WITH A PROGRAM
CALLED TEMPORARY ASSISTANCE TO
NEEDY FAMILIES.
WE ONLY HAVE NOW A MILLION
ADULTS LEFT ON THE ROLLS, HALF
OF THEM ARE IN JUST TWO STATES
CALIFORNIA AND NEW YORK LEAVING
THE REST OF THE STATES WITH
VIRTUALLY NO FUNCTIONING SAFETY
NET FOR FAMILIES WHEN THEY FALL.
FOOD STAMPS IS IMPORTANT,
MEDICAID IS VITAL, THESE ARE
THINGS THAT SEPARATE US FROM THE
DEVELOPING WORLD.
>> Sreenivasan: IF SOMEONE WAS
GOING TO LOOK AT THOSE NUMBERS
AND SAY, LISTEN, ISN'T THAT A
SIGN OF SUCCESS?
DIDN'T WE-- GETTING PEOPLE OFF
THE WELFARE ROLLS, ISN'T THAT
THE END GOAL?
AND IF WE HAVE FEWER PEOPLE ON
WELFARE THAN WE HAVE TODAY,
AREN'T WE BETTER OFF AS A
COUNTRY?
>> SO YES, IF THOSE PEOPLE WENT
TO WORK.
THAT WAS THE GOAL OF THE
PERSONAL RESPONSIBILITY AND WORK
OPPORTUNITY ACT OF 1996-- THE
WELFARE REFORM BILL, THAT PEOPLE
WOULD TAKE PERSONAL
RESPONSIBILITY AND GO TO WORK.
AND WE DO SEE A LOT OF WORK
ACTIVITY AMONG THE TWO DOLLAR A
DAY POOR.
IF YOU LOOK AT CHILDREN IN THAT
CATEGORY, 70% OF THEM HAVE A
WORKER IN THE HOUSEHOLD AT SOME
POINT DURING THE YEAR.
SO THESE ARE FAMILIES HANGING ON
TO THE RAGGED END OF WORK.
ONLY 10% CLAIM EVEN A DIME FROM
OUR WELFARE PROGRAM, SO THEY'RE
NOT A DEPENDENT CLASS OF PEOPLE.
WHAT'S STRIKING IS THAT THESE
FOLKS REALLY SEE THEMSELVES AS
WORKERS AND THEY FEEL VERY PROUD
OF THAT DESIGNATION.
BUT WE CAN'T DENY THAT AT THE
BOTTOM OF THE LABOR MARKET THERE
SIMPLY AREN'T ENOUGH JOBS, MUCH
LESS GOOD JOBS TO GO AROUND.
>> Sreenivasan: SO DID THE
WELFARE REFORM THAT WE TRIED TO
DO IN '96 HAD ANY POSITIVE
BENEFITS?
>> IT DID, AND IN FACT I THINK
THERE IS SOMETHING TO CELEBRATE.
PRIOR TO WELFARE REFORM, WE
PASSED SOMETHING CALLED THE
E.I.T.C., THIS IS A WAGE SUBSIDY
FOR LOW-WAGE WORKERS, THAT
ENSURES...
>> Sreenivasan: THE EARNED
INCOME TAX CREDIT?
>> ...YES, THE EARNED INCOME TAX
CREDIT, THAT IF YOU WORK FULL-
TIME FULL-YEAR AT A LOW-WAGE JOB
YOU WON'T BE POOR.
AND THAT IS A TREMENDOUS POLICY
SUCCESS.
IT'S MAYBE ONE OF THE MOST
SUCCESSFUL POLICIES WE'VE EVER
INVENTED.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT DO WE KNOW-
- DEMOGRAPHICALLY OR
GEOGRAPHICALLY THIS IS HAPPENING
TO ONE GROUP MORE SO THAN
ANOTHER?
>> SO ABOUT HALF OF THE $2 A DAY
POOR ARE WHITE, ABOUT A QUARTER
ARE MARRIED COUPLE FAMILIES, WE
DO SEE SOME CLUSTERING OF THE $2
A DAY POOR IN THE REGION THE
CENSUS CALLS THE SOUTHEAST, SO
THIS INCLUDES APPALACHIA IN THE
DEEP SOUTH, WHICH IS WHY WE
CITED TWO OF OUR FOUR RESEARCH
SITES THERE, THE OTHER TWO ARE
CLEVELAND, OHIO AND CHICAGO, AND
IN OUR BIG CITIES, CITIES LIKE
NEW YORK, YOU DO ALSO SEE A
CLUSTERING OF THE EXTREME POOR.
SO IT'S SORT OF AN EQUAL
OPPORTUNITY CONDITION.
>> Sreenivasan: WHEN IT COMES TO
THIS KIND OF POVERTY, HOW DO WE
GET OUT OF IT?
>> SO THE FIRST THING IS TO
FIGURE OUT WAYS TO EXPAND WORK
OPPORTUNITY FOR MORE AMERICANS,
AND IN DOING THAT, MANY FAMILIES
IN $2 A DAY POVERTY DO HAVE SOME
FRAGILITY, SO WE ARE GOING TO
HAVE TO THINK ABOUT JOBS THAT
HAVE A LITTLE BIT OF GIVE.
RAY MCCORMICK IN CLEVELAND, A
TWO-TIME CASHIER OF THE MONTH;
IN THE FIRST SIX MONTHS OF HER
JOB SHE ACCOMPLISHED THAT BY
MEMORIZING THE BARCODES OF
PRODUCE ITEMS, SPEAKING THOSE
BARCODES INTO HER PHONE, THIS
RECORDING DEVICE AND THEN
PUTTING HER PHONE ON CONTINUOUS
PLAY WHILE SHE SLEPT.
YET THE FIRST TIME THE GAS TANK
WENT EMPTY AND SHE COULDN'T GET
TO WORK, SHE WAS FIRED.
SO WE NEED TO IMPROVE THE
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN EMPLOYEES
AND EMPLOYERS.
>> Sreenivasan: KATHRYN EDIN
THANKS SO MUCH FOR JOINING US.
>> MY PLEASURE.
>> Thompson: A STUDY RELEASED
EARLIER THIS MONTH REVEALED A
STRIKING LACK OF ECONOMIC
MOBILITY IN THE UNITED STATES.
WATCH MY INTERVIEW WITH THE
REPORT'S AUTHORS, ONLINE AT
www.pbs.org/newshour.
MONGOLIA IS A COUNTRY OF THREE
MILLION PEOPLE WEDGED BETWEEN
RUSSIA AND CHINA, THAT IS ALSO
INFLUENCED BY BOTH GIANTS
CULTURALLY AND POLITICALLY.
FROM 1925 UNTIL 1990, MONGOLIA
WAS RULED BY A COMMUNIST REGIME;
THEN CAME A PEACEFUL REVOLUTION
AND A MULTI-PARTY SYSTEM.
AS PART OF ITS TURN TOWARD A
FREE MARKET ECONOMY AND FREE
SPEECH 25 YEARS AGO, MONGOLIA
ALSO DEVELOPED ITS OWN BRAND OF
ROCK AND ROLL MUSIC.
FILMMAKER LAUREN KNAPP TRAVELED
THERE TO PRODUCE A DOCUMENTARY
ABOUT THAT NATION'S EVOLVING
ROCK MUSIC CULTURE CALLED "LIVE
FROM U.B.," A NICKNAME FOR
ULAANBAATAR, MONGOLIA'S CAPITAL.
HERE IS A PORTION OF THE THAT
FILM, EDITED AND NARRATED BY
LAUREN KNAPP.
>> Reporter: MONGOLIA IS A VAST
LANDSCAPE OF JUST THREE MILLION
PEOPLE.
HALF ITS POPULATION IS SPREAD
OUT ACROSS THE RURAL
COUNTRYSIDE, HERDERS AND HEIRS
TO A NOMADIC CULTURE EPITOMIZED
BY 13th CENTURY RULER GENGHIS
KHAN.
THE REST LIVE IN MONGOLIA'S
CAPITAL, ULAANBAATAR, WHERE A
DEMOCRATIC REVOLUTION BEGAN 25
YEARS AGO, AND ENDED SEVEN
DECADES OF SOVIET-STYLE RULE.
THE FIRST GENERATION TO GROW UP
IN THIS NEW SOCIETY HAS COME OF
AGE, AND WHEN I WENT TO
MONGOLIA, I WANTED TO SEE HOW
THEIR FREEDOM EXPRESSED ITSELF
IN MUSIC.
ONE OF THE FIRST ROCK BANDS I
MET WAS MOHANIK, A GROUP OF GUYS
IN THEIR 20s PERFORMING CLASSIC
ROCK.
BUT THE COVERS ARE JUST A WAY TO
MAKE CASH.
WHEN I VISITED THEIR PRACTICE
SPACE, I LEARNED MOHANIK IS MORE
INTERESTED IN WRITING AND
PLAYING THEIR OWN SONGS.
>> OUR MUSIC SOUNDS LIKE IT'S,
WE THINK, IT'S YOUTHFUL,
ENERGETIC, MONGOLIAN-FLAVORED
ROCK AND ROLL.
>> WE WERE NOT SEARCHING FOR
MONGOLIAN SOUND, IT JUST CAME
OUT.
>> Reporter: THAT MONGOLIAN
SOUND MEANS TRADITIONAL
INSTRUMENTS LIKE THE HORSEHEAD
FIDDLE, A SMALL CELLO WITH TWO
STRINGS MADE OUT OF HORSE TAIL
HAIR, OR A YOOCHIN, A KIND OF
DULCIMER PLAYED WITH SMALL
HAMMERS.
>> WE THINK DEFINITELY THIS PART
WOULD BE A MONGOLIAN SOUND, LIKE
THIS.
THAT SOUNDS TO ME LIKE A
MONGOLIAN MELODY.
AND WE'VE GOT THE CHORUS PART.
WE KNOW-- IT SOUNDS MONGOLIAN TO
US.
(CHEERS AND APPLAUSE)
>> Reporter: IN MONGOLIAN ROCK,
FUSION IS THE OPERATIVE WORD,
AND IT STARTED IN THE EARLY
2000s WITH THIS BAND, ALTAN
URAG, WHICH ELECTRIFIED
TRADITIONAL MONGOLIAN
INSTRUMENTS.
THEY'VE TOURED ALL OVER ASIA AND
HAVE PLAYED IN AUSTRALIA AND THE
U.S.
>> IF YOU SEE THE OTHER EXAMPLES
OF OTHER COUNTRIES-- LIKE LATINA
MUSIC, AFRICAN MUSIC, TURKISH
MUSIC-- THEY ARE ALL BASED ON
THE TRADITIONAL MUSICAL
IDENTITY, RIGHT?
AND THAT'S WHY THEY ARE VERY
POPULAR AROUND THE WORLD.
AND THAT'S KIND OF A NO BRAINER
OF HOW TO REALLY GET FAMOUS IN
THE WORLD-- JUST USE THE
TRADITIONAL MUSIC BASE.
>> Reporter: FOR EVERY MONGOLIAN
ROCK BAND, FUSION MEANS
SOMETHING DIFFERENT.
IN THE BAND NISVANIS, YOU CAN
HEAR ECHOES OF AMERICAN GRUNGE.
BANDS LIKE THESE DIDN'T HAPPEN
OVERNIGHT.
DURING DECADES OF COMMUNIST
REPRESSION, WESTERN MUSIC WAS
SMUGGLED IN.
ALBUMS BY BOB DYLAN, THE ROLLING
STONES, LED ZEPPELIN, THE DOORS,
JANIS JOPLIN AND THE BEATLES.
TO COPE WITH THE GROWING
POPULARITY OF WESTERN MUSIC, IN
THE EARLY 1970s, THE FORMER
COMMUNIST GOVERNMENT EQUIPPED
SOME TRADITIONAL MUSICIANS WITH
ELECTRIC GUITARS AND DRUMS
THEY CALLED THE GROUP SOYOL
ERDENE, WHICH MEANS CULTURAL
JEWEL.
>> THIS WAS THE GOVERNMENT BAND.
IT WAS FUNDED FROM THE
GOVERNMENT.
ALL THE SONGS WERE STRICTLY
CONTROLLED IN TERMS OF THE
MEANING.
BUT SOYOLERDENE, I MEAN THEY
MANAGED TO START THIS MODERN
ROCK AND ROLL MOVEMENT HERE.
>> Reporter: THE MOVEMENT SAW
DISSIDENTS WRITING AND RECORDING
THEIR OWN ROCK MUSIC AND
DISTRIBUTING IT UNDERGROUND.
>> THOSE WERE SONGS ABOUT
REALITY, UNEMPLOYMENT AND
DISPARITY OF LIVING STANDARDS-
REBELLION KIND OF SONG SONGS.
>> Reporter: THIS SONG CALLED"
THE RINGING OF THE BELL," ASKED
THE PEOPLE TO BE AWAKENED BY
DEMOCRACY.
IT BECAME AN ANTHEM OF THE
PEACEFUL 1990 REVOLUTION THAT
BROUGHT DOWN THE COMMUNISM AND
USHERED IN MULTI-PARTY ELECTIONS
AND FREE MARKET REFORMS.
>> I GREW UP STANDING IN LINE
FOR MEAT AND MILK AND BREAD, YOU
KNOW?
WHEN I HEARD ABOUT MARKET
ECONOMY AND WHEN I HEARD ABOUT
FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS AND ALL
THESE THINGS, I JUST THOUGHT,"
THIS IS IT."
IN THE COMMUNIST TIME, YOU
SHOULD SAY ONLY NICE THINGS
ABOUT YOUR COUNTRY OR ABOUT YOUR
MOTHER OR ABOUT YOUR PARTY.
BUT YOU WERE NOT ALLOWED TO
EXPRESS OTHER OPINIONS.
SO THAT'S WHY THE FREEDOM OF
SPEECH AND ROCK MUSIC IS VERY
MUCH CONNECTED.
>> Reporter: FOR MOHANIK, THE
GOAL IS MAKING MUSIC THAT IS
ORIGINAL AND AUTHENTIC.
TO MAKE THEIR NEW ALBUM
CONNECTED TO MONGOLIA INA MORE
TANGIBLE WAY, THEY RECORDED
OUTDOORS, IN THE COUNTRYSIDE.
>> WE'RE NOT THE REAL NOMADIC
MONGOLIAN PEOPLE, WE'RE LIKE
CITY PEOPLE.
IT'S NOT LIKE WE GREW UP RIDING
HORSES AND DOING COUNTRYSIDE
STUFF.
>> ANY COUNTRY DEVELOPS, RIGHT?
AND I THINK AFTER SOME YEARS WE
WILL HAVE A GOOD MUSIC INDUSTRY
WITH GOOD RADIO STATIONS THEY
WILL KIND OF GUIDE THEIR
POPULATION TO THE RIGHT PATH.
AND VERY TALENTED GOOD ARTISTS
SHALL BE RECOGNIZED.
>> I DON'T REALLY CARE ABOUT HOW
MANY BANDS ARE THERE, I JUST
WANT THE OVERALL GENERAL PUBLIC
TO HAVE A MUSICAL LIFE.
BECAUSE WE'RE MAKING SOMETHING
THAT WILL LAST.
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SUNDAY.
>> Thompson: AFTER MORE THAN 200
DAYS AT SEA, A BRITISH-BORN
ADVENTURER BECAME THE FIRST
PERSON TO ROW, SOLO, NONSTOP,
FROM NORTH AMERICA TO AUSTRALIA
TODAY.
THE NEWSHOUR'S STEPHEN FEE HAS
THE STORY.
>> Reporter: FOR SEVEN MONTHS,
53-YEAR OLD JOHN BEEDEN ROWED
HIS 20-FOOT LONG BOAT-- NAMED"
SOCKS TWO"-- UP TO FIFTEEN
HOURS A DAY.
AND TODAY, HE SET FOOT ON DRY
LAND IN NORTHEAST AUSTRALIA FOR
THE FIRST TIME IN 209 DAYS.
>> TO BE THE FIRST PERSON TO
ACHIEVE SOMETHING ON THIS SCALE
IS INCREDIBLE REALLY, AND I
CAN'T...
I HAVEN'T PROCESSED IT YET.
>> Reporter: HE LEFT SAN
FRANCISCO JUNE 1-- AND COVERED
SOME 7,400 NAUTICAL MILES ACROSS
THE PACIFIC OCEAN, OCCASIONALLY
MEETING WITH RE-SUPPLY BOATS
ALONG THE WAY.
HE'D ORIGINALLY HOPED TO REACH
AUSTRALIA BY MID-NOVEMBER, BUT
BAD WEATHER SET HIM BACK.
>> IT'S BEEN DIFFICULT THE WHOLE
WAY, BUT IN FAIRNESS THAT'S WHAT
I WAS LOOKING FOR.
I JUST DIDN'T REALIZE THAT IT
WAS GOING TO BESODIFFICULT.
>> Reporter: BEEDEN'S WIFE AND
TWO DAUGHTERS GREETED HIM IN
CAIRNS, AUSTRALIA AROUND
10 O'CLOCK THIS MORNING, LOCAL
TIME; AS DID AUSTRALIAN CUSTOMS
OFFICIALS.
THREE YEARS AGO BEEDEN ROWED
ACROSS THE ATLANTIC, BUT SAYS HE
WAS UP FOR A BIGGER CHALLENGE.
>> DIDN'T THINK I COULD GO ON
AND HAD TO DIG DEEP AND GETTING
PUSHED BACK HUNDREDS OF MILES
THAT YOU HAVE ALREADY ROWED AND
YOU HAVE TO ROW IT ALL AGAIN.
>> Reporter: THERE HAVE BEEN
NINE OTHER SUCCESSFUL ROWBOAT
TRIPS ACROSS THE PACIFIC-- SOME
COMPLETED IN STAGES, OTHERS
LEAVING FROM SOUTH AMERICA
RATHER THAN NORTH AMERICA.
BEEDEN SAYS HE SHED ABOUT ELEVEN
POUNDS ON THE TRANS-PACIFIC
JOURNEY.
HE DOCUMENTED THE VOYAGE ONLINE
WITH PHOTOS AND DISPATCHES.
>> ABOUT 1,450 KILOMETERS--
THAT'S A LONG WAY.
ONLY EVER DO IT ONCE IN YOUR
LIFE.
>> Thompson: THE FRENZY OVER
STAR WARS HIT CHINA TODAY.
THE STARS OF "THE FORCE AWAKENS"
GREETED EXUBERANT FANS AT THE
RED CARPET OPENING IN BEIJING.
MILLIONS OF MOVIE-GOERS IN CHINA
WILL ONLY BE ADDING TO THE
FILM'S BOX OFFICE BOTTOM LINE."
THE FORCE AWAKENS" SOARED PAST
THE $1 BILLION MARK GLOBALLY
THIS WEEKEND TO ALMOST $1.1
BILLION.
IT ACHIEVED THIS MILESTONE IN
ONLY 12 DAYS.
THAT'S THE FASTEST PACE EVER--
BEATING OUT "JURASSIC WORLD."
MEGAN
THOMPSON,.
>> AND THAT'S IT FOR THIS
EDITION OF PBS NEWSHOUR
WEEKEND.
I'M MEGAN THOMPSON.
HARI SREENIVASAN WILL BE BACK
NEXT WEEK.
GOOD NIGHT.